Functional Specification
------------------------

State: Draft. Review and update. Create a Requirement Specification!

Revision history:
2010-02-28 Some additional stuff : Mr Force
2007-12-12 Removed info          : Mr Force
2007-12-xx Review and changes    : Dannil
2007-11-07 Updated               : Mr Force
2007-11-04 Initial draft         : Mr Force


Content
-------
1 OVERVIEW
2 GAME ENGINE
3.1 World
3.2 Friction 
3.3 Different areas
3.4 Game type
3.4.1 Combat
3.4.2 Race
3.4.3 Capture the flag
3.4.4 Laser only (as. "rail-gun only")
3.4.5 Adventure/quest/campaign/journey
4 PLAYER
4.1 Multiplayer
4.1.1 Timing
4.1.2 Dead reckoning
4.2 Ship
4.2.1 Thrust - 'Engine dust'
4.3 AI (bot)
4.3.1 Script 
4.3.2 Adaptive
4.4 Adaptive difficulty against player skill
4.5 Player type
4.5.1 Scoute / stealth
4.5.2 Defender
4.5.3 Fighter
4.5.4 Bomber
4.5.5 Enterprise
4.6 Equipment
4.6.1 Shield
4.6.2 Weapon
4.6.2.1 Canon (bullet)
4.6.2.2 Missile
4.6.2.3 Rocket
4.6.2.4 Homing missile
4.6.2.5 Laser ("Rail gun")
4.6.2.6 Automatic aming gun
4.6.3 Engine
4.6.3.1 Jet
4.6.3.2 Afterburner - turbo
4.6.3.3 Propulsion
4.6.3.4 Lightspeed (Hyper)
4.7 Damage
5 PRESENTATION
5.1 Layer on layer
5.2 Split screen
5.3 Statistics (player rank)
5.4 Menu
5.5 Score
5.6 Scaling
5.7 Message board
6 INPUT
7 CHAT
8 INTRO 
9 DEMO
10 CREDITS / GREETINGS


Background
----------
This document will list all functions that we all will have within the game Fysix.

Functional
----------

1 OVERVIEW
The game shall be built up in a space like environment. It shall be possible to
play against other players, computer players remotely or on the same computer.
The player shall control its space ship through different areas, paths, caves,
open space and more to gain experience and accomplish the active mission.


2 GAME ENGINE
To accomplish the calculation and simulation of a space like evironment an engine
to handle physics and objects shall be used. Here all forces shall be calculated and
handled. This includes accelerations, veclocities and environmental affecting forces.

2.1 Physics
There shall be an engine that handle all the physics for all included objects.

2.2 World object
All objects that shall be handled in the game are included as world objects. Each
world object can be hit-able or non hit-able. Due all object will be affected on
physics according to the physical engine (???). Objects with small masses and high
veclocities will be little affected.

2.3 Collision detection
When objects collide in the world their new velocities and directions shall be
calculate with elastic collision physics. Impact value shall also be calculated
and passed to the object so damage can be applied.


3 LEVEL HANDLER
There shall be a level handler that can handle all enviromental settings and level
configurations. The level handler shall build up the complete level to play in.

3.1 World
The playabe world shall be large. It should take around 5 minutes playtime to get
from one side to another if the player knows the path and there are no obstacles
or other restaining events. If the visible area for the player is about 600x400 then
the total playable world should be around 1000 times larger in both directions.
It shall be possible to play in a small constructed world in the same manner as
it is in a large constructed world.

3.2 Friction 
It shall be possible to change the friction in the level. It shall be possible
to have different frictions in different areas. (0.995, 1.0, 0.45)

3.3 Different areas
It shall be possible to construct levels with big open space areas and those with
small tricky paths and caves.

3.4 Game type
It shall be possible to play different types of missions. The level shall decide 
the type of mission that is played. All game types can also be time limited, the
player that has the most succeded games will gain most experience and win the game.

3.4.1 Combat
In combat mode all players aim to get as many kills as possible. The first player to get
a predetermined number of kills, or has the most kills when time is up will win.
Combat mode can be played in "all to all" mode or in "team mode".

3.4.2 Race
In race mode all players are racing towards each other in a constructed path that shall
be followed. The first player to complete the path will win. There can also be levels
with a looping path and then a predetermined number of laps has to be completed to win.

3.4.3 Capture the flag
It shall be possible to play "capture the flag" between two player teams.
There shall be a time limit or a capture limit. The flags shall be captured at the 
opposite team's base and brought back to the own team's base. If the own flag is on the
own base and the opposite team's flag is brought to the own base then the team will score.
If the own flag is not on the own base it must be brought back before any score can
be achived. After a score the flags' positions are restored to the home bases.
The teams can be a mix of real person players or computer players (ai / bot).

3.4.4 Laser only (as. "rail-gun only")
All game types can also be played in a "laser only" mode. All player's ships are equipped
with a laser. A direct hit will immediately destroy the ship that was hit.

3.4.5 Adventure/quest/campaign/journey
It shall be possible to play a game that has an adventure-like mission. The player must
complete some stages before it goes further to next level and more difficult stages.
This can be played as a single player or togheter with other players.


4 PLAYER
The player shall be controlled by a real person or by a computer player (ai / bot).
It shall be possible to play aa single player but it should also be possible to play
multiplayer.

4.1 Multiplayer
Update information will be sent through an unreliable datagram socket (UDP). Multicast shall
be used if available else the game shall fallback to unicast.
Control information, such as level-information is sent throught a reliable socket (TCP).

4.1.1 Timing
Timing shall be done through time events from reliable control socket. Updates shall be calculated
from this timing and adjusted to a correct behaviour in all connected players game.

4.1.2 Dead reckoning
Dead reckoning shall be used with timing so all connected player will get same correct view of 
world objects active in the game.

4.2 Ship
The player shall control a ship equipped with different mounted engines, shields and weapons.
A ship will move through the playable area with use of its engines. Each engine provides thrust
that gives acceleration in the direction the ship is turned. Engines mounted in such a way that
the thrust vector don't pass though the ship's mass center will additionally provide a momentum
to the ship.

4.2.1 Thrust - 'Engine dust'
Thrust will be presented as a world object effect. This is accomplished through generating engine
dust in the direction of the engine. The dust will have a very small mass and a really short
lifetime and fade away with a smooth feeling. The dust shall change color; directly from the engine
it might be read/yellow to simulate flame and then it changes color towards grey.

4.3 AI (bot)
It shall be possible to play against a computer player. The AI players shall be of different
levels of skill, all from really novice to really excellent.

4.3.1 Script 
The AI shall be able to play according to a predefined, configured, play script. This might be
following a given path or so.

4.3.2 Adaptive
The AI shall have the possibility to learn how it should play in an enviroment. This includes
to watch out for bullets and walls, learn how it is beeing killed by different players. This is
so that it's unlikely to fall for the same trick twice.

4.4 Adaptive difficulty against player skill
If the player gets really excellent and have a high skill in managing the missions and other players,
the game shall adapt the difficult level for the player. This should be controlled through player
statistics and be updated in the level handler. There might be some extra AI ships added just to give
that player a hard life. Even gravity and so should be possible to adjust for that player.
Short, the player will be ranked and all histoial statistics can be read. For a player with
high ranking the playability shall be adaptive and adjustable.

4.5 Player type
It shall be possible to select different player characteristics to achieve unique specialities.

4.5.1 Scout / stealth
A stealth shall be specialized for scouting and for sneaking into an enememy's base camp.
It shall be a light ship with good stearing capabilities, lightly equipped with limited
amount of weapon and a small shield.

4.5.2 Defender
A defender is a large robust ship with heavy defending weapon and large shield.

4.5.3 Fighter
A fighter is fast and equipped with fast weapons.

4.5.4 Bomber
A bomber has heavy damage weapons. It's relatively fast with a good shield.

4.5.5 Enterprise
The Enterprise is a really large ship with heavy weapons and large shield. Enterprise is really hard to
stear and operate. 
Here shall it be possible to team up to control one 'enterprise' ship. One fly and one handle weapons.
For gameplay the 'pilot' may enter autopilot and take over weapon controle while the other player takes
of in a launched figheter ship to do some hauting kills.

4.6 Equipment
It shall be possible to equip the player ship with engines, weapons and shields. There should
also be possible to equip with other useabel equipments such as "keys" or something like that.

4.6.1 Shield
A ship may be equipped with front, left, right and/or rear shield(s).
Damage to a ship will be calculated against hit and weapon type. Then it will first give damage
to the shield. If the shield is destroyed or unfunctional then the ship will get damage.

4.6.2 Weapon
A ship may be equipped with front or rear weapons. In large space ship types such as Enteriprise
there might be automatic aming guns. Every weapon have its own magazine with an amount of rounds.
The mass of these magazines depend on the amount of rounds the magazine supports.

4.6.2.1 Cannon (bullet)
A cannon is a ligth damage but fast weapon.

4.6.2.2 Missile
A missile is an average damage, average launch weapon.

4.6.2.3 Rocket
A rocket is an average damage, average launch weapon.

4.6.2.4 Homing missile
A homing missile is a high hit rate, average damage, average launch weapon.

4.6.2.5 Laser ("Rail gun")
A laser is a high damage, long reload weapon. It consumes large amounts of energy (energy pack as magazine).

4.6.2.6 Automatic aming gun
Automatic aming gun unit. This unit can be equipped upon an Enterprise ship type.
On this gun unit all of the above weapon types can be equipped.

4.6.2.7 Mine
A mine can explore in cluster mines or hard explosive preassure wave.

4.6.3 Engine
All ships are equipped with rear, left and right engines. The rear engine will operate
the ship forward to its current direction. The left and right engines will primary rotate
the ship around its own centerpoint, but will also secondary affect and operate the ship
forward in its current direction.

4.6.3.1 Jet
The Jet engine is the normal engine that consume normal fuel and gives normal speed.

4.6.3.2 Afterburner - turbo
It's a hot version of the Jet-engine. When afterburner is used it affects the
ship's speed immediately.

4.6.3.3 Propulsion
The Propulsion engine is really robust against different space friction and will go smoothely
through all types of friction, regardless of 1.0 or 0.45.

4.6.3.4 Lightspeed (Hyper)
Will accelerate the ship to a tremendious speed. To handle this engine requires a good pilot.
The Lighspeed engine can also be used in Hyper mode wich means that the ship will teleport
to an area in sight distance. This will make it possible to get out of "dead-end" situations.


4.7 Damage
All objects that collides will get damage. The damage shall be calculated from movement energy.
Therefore it will depend upon the mass and speed of the object. However, damage will affect
ships in different ways, some ship types is more durable. When a ship is equipped with a shield
the shield will be affected by the damage first. Different weapon types might give different
damage, reardless of the mass or speed.
The Level or Game type might deside how the damage will affect the world objects.


5 PRESENTATION
The presentaition shall be handled in 2D vector graphic.

5.1 Layer on layer
It shall be possible to give o more detailed view of the gameing area. There shall be possile to add
background objects as well as foreground object. These objects are not possible to run into or affect,
it's only level layout objects.
There shall be a parallax effect to give some depth to the presentation.
At the player level layer all objects will affect each other.

5.2 Split screen
It shall be possible to play multiplayer on a single computer through a split screen view.

5.3 Statistics (player rank)
All player statistics shall be stored.
 * Hit / hits.
 * Used guns.
 * Used amount of bullets.
 * Misses.
 * Kills / killed.

5.4 Menu
A menu system for showing all information shall be used. It shall be possible to see all information about
the ship's current status. A map shall be possible to view.

5.5 Score
A scoreboard shall be used.

5.6 Scaling
Scaling shall be applicable to all objects. If a detailed view is needed the Presentation, Level-handler (or
game engine) shall be able to scale to a large picture. If a large area with lot of space is in front for a
player (or confronting a really large ship or base) maybe it should be possible to zoom out (scale).

5.7 Message board
Notes that happens shall be printed in this message board. Textual message board that notifies player about events.
Text will be typed in a type writer manner with metallic sound.


6 INPUT
It shall be possible to choose several input devices such as keyboard, mouse, serial device or joystick/gameport.


7 SOUND
There shall be background sound such as music.
There shall be 'playing' sounds such as effects.


8 CHAT
It shall be possible to chat with other players through a chat-panel (shown in the menu).


9 INTRO 
There shall be an awesome intro! Some nice pictures on our ...

10 DEMO
There shall be an awesome demo, maybe a video recorded of Mr Force playing!

11 CREDITS / GREETINGS
A long list of all that has helpt us...
